# A New Religion

Originally written July 30, 2014.

Good literature, bad philosophy. Ayn Rand is doubtlessly a great author, but her philosophy, judging by the way she argued it, is about as flawed as Christianity. In fact, the format and function of her philosophy, as presented in Atlas Shrugged, bears an uncanny resemblance to Christianity, or any major religion for that matter.

Christianity, although almost any major religion would serve as an example, presents its basic philosophy in the bible. The bible consists of a collection of stories, some written as recently as about 2000 years others even older. These stories convey certain messages, which can be and is pieced together into a reasonably coherent philosophy. The bible does not answer all questions, nor was it designed to provide an answer for all questions. Rather it was designed to describe the fundamental principles of a certain moral system, the Christian moral system.

By definition a moral system prescribes a list of values and their relative importance to add weight to certain aspects of a decision. By manipulating the importance of certain aspects of a decision, you affect the conclusion made. These values are organized in one primary spectrum which can usually be used to compare any two decisions made using the moral system, good and bad. Certain values which the moral system wishes to encourage are presented as good, others are discouraged by labeling them bad. This labeling is usually not quantitative, but qualitative, using words that have a general positive or negative meaning, but can obviously have a different connotation depending on who uses them and how. When a moral system is presented qualitatively, rather than quantitatively, objective comparisons between two values in the moral system are difficult to make, since each person may form a slightly different understanding of the relative goodness and badness of the values in the moral system.

Thus, people may argue over the exact importances of values in a moral system, these importance can differ causing tension between the different factions all believing they understood the original presentation of the moral system more accurately than their peers. In reality, this is simply an uncertainty of the presentation of the moral system, it wasn’t precise enough for people, asking certain questions, to get a certain, absolute answer. This uncertainty would obviously be eliminated, or at least greatly diminished, if the moral system were to be presented quantitatively rather than qualitatively, since a certain number is objectively larger or smaller than another number.

This begs the question, why are moral systems presented qualitatively, if they would have a far smaller uncertainty if they were presented quantitatively? Simply put: aesthetics. Human communication has historically not been purely about getting ideas across in a precise manner, but to get them across in an elegant manner. Presenting ideas in an aesthetically pleasing way will, with an audience of humans, be far more successful than using dry numbers and charts. However, historically speaking, we are presenting our ideas in an increasingly precise manner, perhaps one day we would present our moral systems quantitatively.

Back to the example in hand, Christianity and its moral system. The bible, being a work of literature, rather than a large data table, presents it’s moral system qualitatively. As discussed above, this would suggest some disagreement in certain details about the moral system, and so it is. There are countless different factions under the broad term Christianity. In fact, there are so many so different factions that the word “Christianity” has more or less lost its meaning. Nevertheless, they all use the bible as the basis for their moral system. This would suggest the uncertainty in the relative importances of the values in the Christian moral system is quite high because so many rational people have found evidence for their, sometimes contradicting, versions of the Christian moral system in the same text, the bible. However measuring the uncertainty of the presentation of the Christian moral system in the bible is not my expertise, so I will leave that to the theologians and clergy.

I have discussed at length the composition and character of a moral system, however Christianity, as Islam, Hinduism, Judaism, and Buddhism are called religions, not just moral systems. A religion is much more than a moral system. Religions throughout history have been designed for more than just helping the individual make decisions accurately, they have helped shape and organize the very fabric of civilization, as we know it. Millennia ago societies were, at their foundation, completely different. Because humans had not yet learned to control as many aspects in nature they were far more dependent on the natural environment around them. Today, we control so many aspects that we are dependent on other humans more than the natural environment. Millennia ago, it was much more difficult to plan very far in the future. The only way large scale organizations of humans could form was for there to be a widespread unity between all the individuals in the society. This is where religion did so well, in unity. Religion and spiritualism helped intellectuals convince laymen of a deep unity between their peers, so they could form larger organizations.

While the many added mechanisms in a religion compared to a moral system are rather difficult to fully map out, perhaps the most significant is the idea of unity. A moral system may put a high importance to the value of unity, but it is not necessarily a religion. A religion has many mechanisms with which it should increase unity across a mass of individuals. Moral systems are de facto nothing more than a way to make individual decisions, religions deal with sociological and large scale issues between groups rather than just the individual.

Arguably every human uses a moral system to make their decisions, in fact one might argue all decisions have to made using a moral system of some sort, however this would be overgeneralizing the concept of a moral system, because there are important distinctions to be made between certain kinds of moral systems.

For example, what if a moral system encourages those that follow it to make decisions without giving certain values different importances? One might argue that is in itself a value; the value not to have values, however calling this a “value”, while technically correct, is rather misleading, since the value itself is against values. Can such a moral system still be called a moral system? Because of the significant difference between a moral system that encourages values and one that discourages values, perhaps we should us a different word to describe this new kind of system. Actually there is already a word that seems to fit the description quite well, the “rational system.”