# Annihilation of the Human Race

Originally written October 10, 2013.

Emotions are the problem. A serious problem. They distort the world around us so much it’s a wonder human civilization still stands. They dominate so much of our daily lives that we they are worth it in our modern world.

Thousands of years ago, before advanced civilization they were vital for survival, but now they are slowing us down. Back then, yes they were important, they helped us make fast decisions based on instinctually judged evidence. They helped us stay on track and prevented our extinction in various ways.

But now the world for humans is very different than 10,000 years ago, today we have taken control of our environment, of our development, so much so that evolution itself is no longer relevant to humans. It is near impossible for us to become extinct (except if we kill ourselves), we beat nature. Sure there is still a chance that an asteroid might hit the earth and kill us all, but the chances of that are extremely low, so as long as we don’t kill ourselves there is nothing to fear. In a couple years when we settle on Mars or some Moon we will even be safe from the asteroid problem. Then perhaps our biggest problem will be that the sun will die, wait a couple more years and intergalactic space-travel will end those worries. Basically, as long as we don’t kill ourselves we are immortal.

However this one little problem “as long as we don’t kill ourselves” is a big one. We are very close to exterminating our species, with an arsenal of nuclear weapons large enough to bomb the entire world many times over, really it’s just a matter of time before some crazy person pulls the trigger.

“Some crazy person,” well emotions are what make us passionate and crazy more than anything else. No one can deny, emotions impede rational thought. Without rational thought all we have is irrational thought, which by definition is illogical, or in other words it “makes no sense” -> crazy.

So there it is, my proof for why emotions are the greatest danger to the human species. Emotions are a far greater threat than anything nature could ever throw at us.

Now of course there is the problem that little can be done about emotions, they are inherent. Emotions are unfortunately one of the few things that we are actually born with, no way around it. But hold on, if we are actually born with emotions, then they are, so to speak, in our DNA, then perhaps there is something we can do about them…

That’s right, I am advocating for us to focus as much of our scientific progress into finding a way to literally delete emotions from our DNA as possible. As far as I know we don’t have the capabilities to do so presently, however perhaps in the future, when we learn more about genetic engineering and the human DNA, perhaps one day our species can be free of the constant threat, the threat of our emotions getting the better of us leading to the complete annihilation of the human race.

I suppose I cannot call this a complete analysis of the danger of emotions before asking whether or not emotions are perhaps worth keep, if there is perhaps some benefit that out-weighs the risks. Unfortunately, there is only on benefit I can see to them, that they give us pleasure and displeasure. And what extreme pleasure/displeasure they can give. However what we have to keep in mind that we must not necessarily forfeit this pleasure/displeasure by forfeiting emotions. All I wish to do is change the cause of this pleasure and displeasure. Rather than us feeling such pleasure/displeasure for irrational reasons (at times) we should adjust the scale. We should feel pleasure when we are doing something rational and displeasure when something irrational. Our emotions should reinforce our reason, just think what effect this would have on humanity. If we are driven, by our emotions, to act rationally, completely rationally. No more crazy passionate people, no more “I just felt like it” excuses, no more bravery or cowardice, no more ethics. Just cold, calculating reason.

I have absolutely no idea what civilization would look like then, but I can guarantee you, better than what we have now, better than our wildest dreams.

But I digress, emotions have served their purpose, once they were vital to survival, today emotions may seem irrational, but they do have a base in rationality. Emotions are not random, they are in a sense calculated, they are the best set of suggestions nature could provide us. Every emotion from fear to happiness to love can be explained by some cause. Love for example, studies suggest that we don’t fall in love with random people, but actually through pheromones we “pick” people that are likely to have very different DNA, giving the offspring a higher chance of variation. Even love has a biological basis, however this is of little help to us today. Because humans are no longer dependent on genetic variation for survival, so these valuable lessons that natural selection and evolution have taught nature over the years are no longer necessary, now it may be more important for us to specialize, rather than vary.

Human development has far surpassed nature’s development, our needs today are no longer satisfied by nature. The emotional system is the problem, it develops only as fast as evolution, as it is in our DNA. But humans develop much faster rendering the primitive emotional system ineffective and even detrimental. We have to break free from nature’s outdated emotional system and expand into the prevalent rational system.

That way we can fulfill the task that nature has set every species that ever lived, to become immortal. Previously the environment has killed off those species that could not adapt fast enough, but humans don’t have that problem. Rather than adapting to our environment we manipulate the environment to adapt to us. So unless either we commit the one and only true crime of nature, to extinguish one’s own species, or the environment changes too abruptly for us to manipulate it (asteroids, global warming…) there is nothing that can stop us.