# Mathematical and Scientific Constructs

Originally written March 13, 2018

In popular culture, mathematics, engineering, and science are commonly lumped together. They are termed the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) fields, to differentiate from art or the humanities. While this grouping may be convenient for administration purposes and judging by the day-to-day activities of their practitioners may resemble one another, a closer examination of their foundations paints a very different picture. Furthermore, misunderstanding how these fields operate significantly hinders the progress we can make therein. Here I mean to describe the inner workings of mathematics and distinguish it from science, and then discuss the implications of this analysis on the metaphysical basis for science.

# The Perfect World

Mathematical knowledge is categorically different from scientific knowledge. Unlike science, mathematics uses deductive reasoning, which allows the knowledge derived thereof to be absolutely certain, and eternal. For example, the Pythagorean theorem can be proven, which completely removes any doubt in the relationship between the lengths of the sides of a right triangle. Furthermore, if we imagine that everyone on earth sudden forgot the Pythagorean theorem, it would still be true, and it could still be proven because it's proof does not depend on the memory of humans, only on definitions and relations of abstract concepts.

However therein we see the defining feature of mathematical knowledge – it is completely abstract, ie. it doesn't depend on anything in the real world. 2 + 2 = 4 even if the sun stops rising in the east. An unfortunate consequence of this decoupling of mathematics from the real world is that we cannot make any conclusion related to the real world using mathematics alone. Now you may protest – why is it that we learn calculus when studying physics if we can’t make conclusions about the real world with it? This has less to do with the power of mathematics, and more with the flexibility of science, but we will discuss that in detail in a later section. Suffice to say, there is not one integral, not a single mathematical proof that relies on our understanding of physics.

However, from the perspective of mathematics, this is a blessing. Mathematics is not constrained by what we can measure, and it does not promise to predict what numbers will appear on the oscilloscope screen for a given experiment. Instead, it is a system of arguments which are either valid or invalid

Note that I do not draw a distinction between mathematics and logic. Both are formal systems of abstract concepts, and in both we make arguments and prove the validity of those arguments using formal rules and definitions. In fact, that is all that is done in math. Here argument refers to a set of statements called premises or assumptions, followed by a statement called the conclusion. The argument is valid if and only if the conclusion follows from the premises, which means if all the premises are true, then the conclusion must necessarily be true. The validity of an argument is shown by transforming the premises (or other statements that follow from the premises) into the conclusion using a set of operations defined by the proof system used.

This picture of mathematics is quite succinct, mathematicians simply make arguments prove their validity, and then use those conclusions to make new arguments. To further simplify the description, we can say the mathematical community has collectively adopted a set of premises including the axioms underlying all of algebra, calculus, topology, number theory, statistics, complexity theory, logic, and the rest which are taken to be true, and now what mathematicians spend their time on is trying to prove the truth of statements using those axioms. While technically it would still be math to make arguments that use a different set of premises (in fact, that is how new branches of mathematics begin), the set of premises we have chosen is already complex enough that mathematicians are having a hard time proving lots of statements for which we would dearly like to know the truth value.

Unfortunately, there are two important realizations to this description. The first of which is that mathematics is completely static. Given any set of premises, every statement a mathematician could write down is already either true or false, before the mathematician even writes it down. Using our chosen set of axioms, 2 + 2 = 4 is true, but that does not depend on our beliefs, and neither do seemingly much harder problems like P vs. NP.

Therefore, a mathematician is not creating anything new. Any statement any mathematician ever proves is true before he proved it. This means mathematics is fundamentally not a creative process, but an explorative process. While the truth value of all mathematical statements is already set in stone, we humans are only aware of the truth values of the statements we have proven. While a mathematician certainly creates a proof, the truth of the statement he proves does not depend on the proof, so the proof is merely the medium by which the mathematician convinces the rest of the world of the truth of the statement in question.

Our mathematical knowledge consists of a long list of statements together with their truth value. Strictly speaking, one could argue mathematical knowledge also includes the methodology for creating proofs. However, obviously such knowledge can only be used to write more proofs. Since I am more concerned with how we use mathematical knowledge in areas beyond just math, and this list of statements is the only part of mathematical knowledge we can hope to use elsewhere, I will treat the entirety of mathematical knowledge as the statements we have proven or disproven.

A mathematician explores the abstract world defined by the premises he chooses to uncover the truth value of statements for which we are as of yet uncertain. However, since the truth values of all statements in such a world are pre-determined, and independent of the mathematician’s (or anyone else’s) understanding, all of mathematics is static and merely explorative. Each time a mathematician proves or disproves a statement we merely become aware of an eternal fact, which is then added to our mathematical knowledge base.

Unfortunately, the story doesn’t end there. Before, we simply let the mathematicians loose, we might want to make sure our proof system won’t allow false statements to be proven, ie. soundness, and that any statement which is true can in fact be proven, ie. complete. As it happens, that is not the case. What’s worse, by Goedel’s Incompleteness Theorem, there does not exist a proof system which is both sound and complete. This means we must either accept an inconsistent version of math, where it’s possible to prove certain statements that are actually false, or we accept that there are certain true statements that we are unable to prove. Incidentally, we have chosen to use a proof system which is sound (but not complete), which means we can safely trust every proof produced, but it also means there are some statements we can never hope to prove or disprove.

# Mathematical Constructs

Let’s take a big step back. In the previous section, we described mathematics from a mathematical perspective. We analyzed how a mathematician works using concepts of arguments, proofs, logic. Finally, we even used some results from mathematics to reason about the field and its limits. Now we’ll pull back the curtain of abstraction and describe mathematics from the perspective of the real world, without resorting to concepts therein.

Naively, mathematicians make arguments to convince other mathematicians of the truth of statements. Such arguments are called proofs. So far, the description sounds analogous, but now the story changes when we ask: what does it mean to prove a statement?

Quite simply, it means whatever the mathematician wrote in that “proof,” call her Alice, was convincing enough to make the mathematical community (and the rest of the world) agree with her. Sure, if you ask one newly convinced mathematician, call him Bob, he will tell you that the statement is true because the alternative creates a contradiction in our proof system. Since we use a sound proof system, we can’t have that, so the statement must be true.

But for argument’s sake, let’s not buy into all of that. Ultimately that’s all just logic jargon for why Bob believes the statement to be true. Without buying into math and logic, all we can really say is that Alice convinced Bob using math (whatever that is). Apparently, Alice’s argument was particularly convincing, because the whole world (minus us) now agrees with her. In fact, if we are so suspicious, we could study up on math – watch a couple of lectures online, check Wikipedia, maybe read up on a couple related papers, and we might also be convinced. But that sounds like a lot of work, and Bob seems trustworthy enough – he and Alice probably know what they’re talking about.

This description of how mathematics operates is far more skeptical, however we are still able to describe Alice’s, Bob’s and the mathematical community’s behavior. Perhaps Bob believes Alice’s argument will help him make his own argument more convincing, but nevertheless the mathematical community will perhaps not be convinced by Bob’s argument. However, his colleagues might point out the flaws in his argument, and with some improvements, perhaps Bob’s argument can one day also convince everyone. If we ask Bob he can tell us, that indeed there are lots of things he believes now, which he was uncertain about before, so obviously he believes we have gained knowledge because of Alice’s argument. In short, mathematicians will continue to write proofs, and their colleagues may or may not be convinced. The result of this process is that the world gains mathematical knowledge.

Mathematics is not usually described so distrustfully because at least the broad strokes of the field can be understood with just a handful on concepts (see previous section). However, this perspective has done the seemingly impossible – it has made math indistinguishable from a science.

If we are just as skeptical of say biology, then the behavior of mathematicians and biologists is identical. Biologists make arguments, to convince each other of the truth of statements. If we ask a biologist why he was convinced by some argument, he might point to colorful plots or start describing some biology jargon, perhaps he’ll even invoke logic or math. Once again, let’s not listen too closely. Without thinking about the details of why the argument is convincing or not, we’ll just observe how the scientific community responds. Some might be convinced by the argument, others might point out flaws, or suggest improvements. Finally, the biologists will agree that the world gains knowledge about biology from such new arguments, just like mathematics. Now it seems we have a contradiction with the introduction section, is math and science the same or not?

Math is not a science. There is an important distinction discussed in the previous section which we have not considered – all the arguments in math are abstract, while all arguments in science pertain to the real world. This may seem insignificant, especially considering we’re not focusing on the details of the arguments the mathematicians and scientists presented. However, I shall demonstrate the consequence below.

Imagine you are ruler of some kingdom and to help you make decisions you enlist two advisers, one scientist and one mathematician. It just so happens that the mathematician has access to the entire base of mathematical knowledge but nothing else, and similarly the scientist can access all scientific knowledge but nothing else. The benevolent ruler that you are, you travel around your kingdom helping your subjects solve their problems. Whenever you are approached by someone with a problem or question, you ask each of your advisers what their respective field says on the matter.

What you will observe is that no matter what issue you face, the scientist might be able to suggest some rule of thumb or causal relation for getting what you want. Granted, the scientist’s advice might not always work, but it’s better than nothing. Meanwhile the mathematician always stays silent, unable to give you any advice. Why? With mathematics alone, you can’t make any real-world decisions. That is not what mathematics was designed to do. As we discussed in the previous section, mathematics deals exclusively with abstract concepts. If you want to know something about numbers, or functions, or shapes, or any other such abstract object, math is the way to go. However, there’s no such thing as a straight-line segment in the real world, let alone a right triangle, but for the Pythagorean theorem to be true, we require the associated premises to be true.

The core of the problem is that whatever mathematical world you construct with whatever premises, the world requires perfection. Meanwhile in the real world, even the most trivial of statements like “the sun rises in the east” cannot be uttered with complete certainty because no matter how often we have seen the sun rise in the east, it’s always possible for the next observation to be inconsistent with the past. The certainty and eternity of mathematics have become it’s undoing when we apply it to the real world.

# The Scientific Method

Most likely, you are not satisfied with that explanation. Sure, there’s no such thing as a true right triangle in the real world, but by connecting three lengths of wood we can construct something that looks an awful lot like a right triangle, and then we can use the Pythagorean theorem, right?

Sort of, the problem is that in mathematics the Pythagorean theorem begins and ends with true right triangles, if you don’t make the necessary assumptions about the absoluteness of the right triangle, you will not be able to prove the theorem. Math alone is not able to (and incidentally not interested in) proving any relationship between the lengths of wood you connected. Instead we must appeal to a different area of knowledge to make decisions in the real world – science.

In science, we deal with models instead of arguments. Models can and should be thought of as black boxes which take in some empirical data, manipulate that data in some way to produce a conclusion (or prediction if the conclusion refers to the future). This conclusion is essentially a decision of some kind, ranging from base motor actions, like standing up, to abstract decisions like “Quantum Field Theory is amazing.” The defining feature of a model is that it uses sensory data and produces a conclusion related to the real world in some way. With this simple construct, we can describe any decision-making process as evaluating some model which produces the decision as output and takes in whatever data was used to make the decision.

Now we can understand how and why we are seemingly able to use the Pythagorean theorem to decide something about our pieces of wood. We use a model which takes in, for example, the observation of the pieces of wood with measuring tape aligned in such a way to measure the lengths of two lengths of wood. Then the model parses the data from the measuring tape, recognizes that the pieces of wood bear a certain similarity to the mathematical construct of a right triangle, and applies the Pythagorean theorem to conclude the length of the third piece of wood.

The key insight here is that the model operates not in the perfect world of mathematics. It simply transforms the input in someway to get the result, but for the decision’s sake it doesn’t matter what the definition of a true right triangle is in mathematics. In fact, we don’t even have to know the model uses any idea related to math, if we treat it as a complete black box, we simply use the conclusion and act accordingly.

These models sound like cool objects, but where do they come from? That is certainly a deeper question than can fully be answered here, but for now let us imagine another black box where we feed in all the observations we’ve ever made and all the knowledge we’ve ever accumulated (including mathematical knowledge), and then the output is a new model; we might call this complicated black box “creativity.”

It might also be useful to differentiate between two types of models: formal and imaginary. A formal model is not a black box in any way, ie. one where you can list off all input parameters and where the transformation is known completely. On the other hand, an imaginary model is a black box where we can only speculate about inner workings. It follows that for virtually all decisions we make, we use imaginary models because we usually can’t explicitly describe how the input data is processed to produce the result, eg. it’s difficult to articulate all the reasons why you are still reading this.

Now that we have a source of new models, we must learn how to choose which models we should keep using for our decisions and which ones to discard. This is precisely what the scientific method is, a method for comparing models.

Given two models that answer the same question, science uses two principles to decide which is superior – one is statistical and the other is aesthetic. The statistical principle simply says the model that has in the past produced the better result more often is superior. This is simply the application of inductive reasoning to this problem. The second principle is slightly more complicated, but for now let’s think about it as being a generalized application of Occam’s Razor. Since there are a few subtleties to the aesthetic component, it is generally used more as a tie breaker when the two models produce similar results.

Science also provides a formal procedure to apply these principles to compare models, especially the statistical one. Since it’s inception, we have developed several variants to the method, but in general it is called experimentation. The traditional, albeit somewhat uncommon form, is two first choose a set of models that are to be compared, called the candidate models. Now we identify the set of all variables that affect the prediction made by each of the models, and choose one of these variables, called the changed variable. Then, holding all other variables constant, we select some values of that changed variable for which to compare our models, which are usually chosen based on how easily we can observe the changed variable with that value, or how important it is for our model to be accurate for those values. Next, we predict the outcome using each of our models using the same input data. Finally, we compare the predictions to the observed outcome. If a model was significantly more accurate in its prediction, we conclude it is statistically superior, otherwise we might appeal to aesthetics about the utility of each model in question. There are numerous variants to this general procedure, but all boil down to comparing models to identify the best one to answer certain questions.

Unfortunately, when dealing with imaginary models, experimentation becomes significantly more difficult because we don’t know exactly what variables an imaginary model uses to produce the prediction. In this case, we must simply identify what variables we think are most relevant and hope that we don’t miss any major factors. Consequently, we cannot compare models as definitively using this weaker form of experimentation, but nevertheless, based on the results of the experiment, we can identify what appears to be the superior model.

Using these descriptions of math and science, the use of math has become completely incidental. Science functions completely independently of math. Consequently, the value of mathematical knowledge is now very difficult to justify over any other kind of knowledge. Sure, if the model we develop using math gives us better results, we will use it happily, but the instant our “math-derived” model can’t keep up with any other model – it is discarded.

The point is that this perspective has radically altered the traditional conception of the relationship between mathematics and science. It’s not that mathematics is the foundation to science, it’s not that mathematics is the most “pure” science – it’s that time and time again, mathematics must prove its value to science, and if it fails to do so, it is dropped instantly.

Is that realistic, though? Will we ever develop models that are superior those that use mathematical knowledge? Looking at the history of science, it certainly appears that those models that use mathematics have fared better than any alternative, seems like quite a coincidence if math is just one of infinitely many way to process data to make a decision? Well, actually it’s not a coincidence at all, it’s actually a consequence of that terrible decision mathematicians had to make between soundness and completeness. Because our proof system in mathematics is sound (ie. we do not allow contradictions), all mathematical knowledge is consistent. This appears to be very compatible with our observations in the real-world. In fact, the basis of inductive reasoning is the idea that the world displays “more of the same,” that is, if we make a certain observation we are more likely to make a similar observation than a dissimilar one.

This observed continuity in the real world bears a striking resemblance to the consistency displayed by mathematics, consequently, it is relatively easy to create models which apply mathematical or logical principles to make real-world decisions. Nevertheless, if we want to make the best possible decisions in the real world, we realize there is no guarantee that models that use mathematical knowledge will always be superior to those that don’t.

Thus far, I have described science as a completely asocial process. You could do science by yourself your entire life, without relying on anyone else’s observations or ideas. However, as our species has learned, being social can have very significant advantages. The problem is that models are abstract objects, and since science deals in models, how can hope to conduct science collectively. The trick is – as with all social processes – language. We indirectly communicate our models through explanations, which are descriptions of what we think the most important aspects of our models are. For example, let’s say Alice has developed a new model which challenges Bob’s model. Now they can each explain their models to one another using any manner of complicated concepts and abstract ideas. Then they can both conduct experiments themselves and compare results. If the results don’t match, then they can continue describing their models to one another until they agree on the results, at which point whichever model was deemed superior is kept by both while the other is abandoned (or improved and tested again).

However, since we cannot directly communicate models from one person to another, especially not imaginary models, no matter how well Alice describes he model to Bob, the model he develops as a result of her explanation will undoubtedly be somewhat different to the model she was imagining. While this may seem like a significant source of error in science, this is actually an invaluable benefit. The slightly noisy transmission of models from one person to another is the chief source of new even better models. To extend the example before, while Bob explains his model to Alice, she might gain a new insight from something he said, and thus create a new model, better than either of the original models.

This reinforces the idea that the details of how exactly a model processes the input data into the output decisions is not important to science because ultimately it is only an explanation of the model that can be shared with others. In an asocial sense, you can do science yourself your entire life and develop increasingly more accurate models to make better decisions, but then you have to come up with very new idea to integrate into your models. On the other hand, by sharing your models with someone else, you gain an additional source of ideas that might improve your models.

Under this description of science, it turns out, most worthwhile ventures in life are science. Science is a method to improve the way you make any decision in the real world. The fields we generally associate with science (physics, chemistry, biology, etc.) are merely categories of questions for which we seek better models. However, decisions like “how should people act in society?” “What caused the Great War?” or “What law will increase the Gross Domestic Product?” are all decisions we make with models just like any others. Thus, fields like economics, history, anthropology, linguistics, and philosophy make use of science just as much as physics, biology, chemistry, and the like.

In a very real sense, that’s all there is to all of science: We create models, run experiments to compare them to our preexisting ones, discard the inferior ones, and repeat. Science does not constrain how the model manipulates the input data to produce the output in any way. This means that a priori a model that happens to use mathematical or logical knowledge is no better than one that relies on no knowledge at all. It is only after we compare the predictions made by the models to our observations that we can identify which model is superior.

Additionally, if we conduct more experiments tomorrow, the answer may change, and the other model may turn out to be superior. This means science is fundamentally dynamic, any model we use at the moment we might instantaneously discard for a different one (no matter how exactly it actually works) provided it is statistically and/or aesthetically superior.

# Scientific Metaphysics

Using this perspective, let us investigate the metaphysical basis for science and reality. The first and most important consequence of this description of science is that no statement referring to the real world is true or false. This follows from science being dynamic, so any statement our models tell us is true today, may be false tomorrow if we found superior models that assert the opposite.

This strong relativism may seem very unintuitive because now we’re not allowed to assert anything about the real world with absolute certainty. However, this also solves the problem associated with scientific realism automatically.

The metaphysics of science boils down to the following two statements which we must reconcile with our observations:

1. Science describes how the world really works.
2. For any statement describing the real world, we cannot know with absolute certainty whether it is true or false.

Intuitively, we would like to assert both to be true, but that would lead to a contradiction, so instead we have developed scientific realism which asserts (1) and rejects (2), and scientific non-realism which rejects (1) and asserts (2). The problem is that if (2) is true then that means we cannot with certainty assert (1) without a contradiction.

Consequently, scientific realism rejects (1), and searches for a method by which to know a statement in the real world with absolute certainty. From this perspective, we can define right and wrong simply as statements which are absolutely true and false, respectively. The problem is in trying to reconcile this theory with inductive reasoning. Inductive reasoning is inherently uncertain, and it appears that is the only form of reasoning we can use in matters related to the real world.

A far cleaner, and more interesting approach is scientific non-realism. In fact, the only downside is that we must be a little wearier about our intuition about how the world works, and instead we must rely on the consequences of the statements we have proposed thus far.

There is no such thing as a fact, at least not in the real world. The concepts of right and wrong are meaningless. Even more alarming, strictly speaking, we can’t even compare the decisions of two different people because they used imaginary models to make those decisions, and they have no way of communicating those models to us precisely, so we can’t conduct an experiment to compare the two models. In practice, we do commonly compare people’s decisions by approximating the imaginary models they used, however accurately approximating other people’s this is a science onto itself (depending on the precise question you ask, this fall into the fields of sociology, psychology, ethics, economics, etc.).

Instead of right and wrong, we can use the concepts of better and worse. Decision A is better than decision B if and only if the model that was used to make decision A is scientifically superior to the model that used to make decision B.

Now we realize that the goal of science is not it identify how the world really works, it is only to allow us to make increasingly better decisions. Today only a small fraction of the population focuses on food production, while 1000 years ago it was the overwhelming majority. This has nothing to do with us understanding more about how the world really works, it merely means the models we use today are superior than those used back then.

It may be more useful to think of the real world as just one of the many video games available. In this particular video game, call it “reality,” we aim to maximize our score, just as in other video games. To maximize our score, we have to study how our actions lead affect our score. Practically speaking, this involves doing science to find models which allow us to make decisions that maximize our utility.

There may or may not be some underlying structure to how “reality” works, but the existence of a deeper ontological basis is, on its own, neither necessary nor relevant to our purpose. The power of this metaphysical foundation is that we do not have to find a way to justify the truth of some set of fundamental assumptions we would like to be absolute. For example, religions usually define some set of statements which are asserted with absolute certainty, however the justification for why we can be so certain about the truth of those statements is ever elusive.

We set out to understand how mathematics and science functioned. In doing so, we realized that when analyzing math, not through the lens of a perfect world as it usually is, but from the perspective of what it entails in the real world, we recognized the limits therein. Mathematics is the “science” of a completely abstract world. Mathematical knowledge is only knowledge in so far as we can made decisions using it. This means it is the scientist that actually generates knowledge when creating the model that can be used for making decisions, and not the mathematician because without doing science, ie. creating a model and comparing it to others, we cannot use mathematical knowledge. Since we must treat the scientist’s model as a black box, it is not relevant whether mathematical knowledge was used in its creation or not. The most mathematics can hope for is to be used by science, but it is certainly not a foundation for science.

Science uses the principles of statistics and aesthetics to compare models and decide which ones are superior. Thereby we defined a procedure to improve our models by experimentation. Consequently, we can no longer rely on the concepts of right and wrong to guide our decision making. Instead we simplify our ontological foundation to be concerned with nothing more than the utility of our decisions, and thereby the value of our models. This effectively puts science at the center of reality, as it determines both our purpose (to improve our models for better decisions), and the method by which we can achieve this goal (using the statistical and aesthetic principles).

# Example: Formal Models in Practice

Here we will work through a simple example to understand the role of formal models in science, and how exactly we make decisions using “scientific theories.” Newton’s second law is a prime example of a formal model which makes use of mathematical knowledge. It asserts that the net force applied to a body is equal to the body’s mass times its acceleration (or F = ma).

Now imagine you are taking a physics exam, but it’s an easy one. The question asks you what the acceleration of an object with a mass of one kg is when applying a force of ten Newtons. This is a simple application of Newton’s second law, so let’s just fill in the numbers, do the computation and write down the answer, “10 m/s^2” – done.

However, we can use the tools we developed in the previous section to gain a deeper understanding of what transpired here. In fact, we can even do without any knowledge about physics or math, ie. without buying into Newtonian mechanics, and basic math like multiplication.

First, we recognize that the result of whatever happened, you wrote “10 m/s^2” on your exam. To make that decision you must have applied a model. We might speculate what kind of data you used as input to that model, perhaps it was the question stated on the exam, or maybe the memory of watching your physics professor draw symbols on a chalkboard. It’s not possible to say precisely what empirical data you used to make that decision, thus you must have used an imaginary model, and not a formal model to make that decision.

The point is that is it not sufficient to say you used Newton’s second law to make the decision to write “10 m/s^2” on your exam, because Newton’s second law doesn’t not account for a myriad of other possible decisions you could have made. You could have drawn a smiley face instead, but no matter what values to input to Newton’s second law, you won’t ever get a smiley face as an output.

Formal models are not meant to be evaluated, they are merely tools we use for explaining models. Just as the concepts of force, acceleration, and mass are merely meant to help us understand how we can use models like Newton’s second law to make decisions, so too does the law itself only help us construct our own imaginary models.

The professor can easily write “F = ma” on the board, and he can describe what each letter represents. He can even go into gruesome detail about how this seemingly innocent equation can be turned into a partial differential equation to solve for the equations of motion of a system of particles in some potential. However, no matter what concepts he describes, and no matter how often he, the models they construct will be imaginary, but the hope is that if he forces enough math and physics jargon down his students’ throats, the resulting models might bear some resemblance to the models he himself uses to answer such questions, and thereby the students don’t have to rule out the models the professor has.

# Example: Foundations of Physics

The difference between what is fundamental and what is composite is a matter of the model that is used. It is a matter of the perspective. By changing the theory parameters you change what is fundamental and what is composite