# The Iron Law of Oligarchy

Originally written April 17, 2014.

As I understand it, every group of individuals that have to make decisions that affect the collective have to have some sort of system to make decisions the collective can agree with, this system can be called political system of the organization or society. According to the iron law of oligarchy, this political system will inevitably end up with a minority making decisions for the collective, while the majority becomes passive to the decision-making. Throughout history all societies have embodied this law in some form, but that doesn't mean there is no society that cannot break this law. For one thing, all organizations have encouraged a certain amount of inequality within the organization in order to improve efficiency. As can be seen in the military, having a strict hierarchy can be amazingly efficient.

But what if an organization does not encourage inequality, but instead encourage equality. I don't mean, as Schubert criticized to "level" the society absolutely and to punish anything out of the norm, but to simply encourage standardization rather than specialization. For example if a company shifts it's employees' jobs every few months, from janitor to clerk to manager to executive and back again. Not only would workers learn far more about the company, but the company would also become much more adaptive. If someone leaves it doesn't matter because everyone is trained to do virtually every job.

In such a system the iron law of democracy is broken. You would still have executives in the society/company that make decisions, but you don't have a fixed elite. Rather everybody in the society holds a little more power for a short period of time. This could in principle work just as a direct democracy, because now you don't have fixed representatives and represented. However, as Schubert pointed out direct democracies have problems when the organization gets very large.

But why does it have to get very large? Why do we need vast empires ruled by one government? Think about how vast some countries are, for example China, which is roughly the size of all of Europe, how can one government take care of all those people and all that land. It would be far more effective to split that into lots of small organizations, which could then take advantage of a direct democracy rather than being forced to use a representative democracy due to our sheer size. America, Canada, Russia, China, Brazil, India... all of them massive! I think a manageable size would be more like Luxemburg or Rhode Island (around 2,500 sqkm). Population wise we can't keep order with hundreds of millions and in some countries even billions; a more manageable population might be around 500,000 (approximate population of Luxembourg).

There wouldn’t be a need for any higher organization or government beyond organ because all intra-organ decisions can be made by the organ independently. If the need arises for inter-organ decisions those can in a similar style to a representative democracy today.