# The Perfect Species

Originally written April 13, 2013.

I propose the development of advanced social skills in a species can have two opposite ultimate goals. One might be termed Universal and the other Private. The Universal goal is for the species to live as an efficient, stable, and sustainable species in its environment. The Private goal is for the species to control more and more aspects of its environment. Both of these goals mean to improve the chances of survival for a species in the environment.

At first the Universal and Private goals may not seem like opposites, but in fact they are complete opposites, as seen by their descriptions:

In the Universal goal the species embraces the environment, it uses its social capabilities to become “the perfect species,” within its environment, the species is in perfect harmony with the environment. Of course through biological mechanisms the original species that works toward the Universal goal, may expand to other environments, and it may flourish in some while struggling in others, or perhaps split into multiple different species through speciation. Nevertheless, it will work as efficiently as the species can, while natural selection and evolution might make it easier for the species to *adapt* to its environment. The species that exhibits this type of social behavior will adapt to its environment, and will, with time, become more and more efficient within its environment.

In the Private goal the species denies, or negates its environment. As time goes on such a species might slowly take control of variables within the environment. With such biological concepts of culture, passing on knowledge to future generations, the species may develop independently of evolution. It may learn to do things much faster than evolution could teach it. It may be able to adapt and grow in a new environment much faster than evolution would allow it to. This means that speciation might not occur as often, as the species is growing rather than migrating. A species like this takes power into its own hand, it doesn’t wait for evolution to save or doom a species. While it grows it is harder to kill, because it understands more of its environment and can adjust to any changes. This species, given time, also becomes “the perfect species,” because it could adjust so quickly to any change in the environment that it is virtually impossible to be killed off. Evolution is too slow to adapt the species to fast changes in the environment, so how does the species compensate? The species *manipulates* its environment. It no longer is dependent on what nature throws at it; it can defend itself to rapid changes in the environment. This comes at a cost. Because such a species changes its environment to fit its needs, it might try to make the environment more comfortable that it actually should be. Now that it has learned so quickly how to control variables in its environment (because of its social behavior), it can begin to shape the environment just like the species wants it. It could get rid of its predators, the predators, who may not be social, and may be developing at evolutionary speeds, won’t have a chance to a species that has broken off evolution and has taken development into its own hand. This means that a species that uses its social behavior to reach the Private Goal may actually greatly damage the environment, because they are shaping it in their own eye, not the eye of nature. Since they develop faster than nature, nature doesn’t stand a chance.

In the known universe there are several species of animals that have developed social behaviors to achieve the Universal goal. All eusocial insects (including ants, bees, termites and hornets) are working toward the Universal goal, also there are some herd animals like wolves, deer, buffalo that show some characteristics akin to the Universal Goal. On the other hand, there is only one species that uses its social skills to achieve the Private goal, humans. But this does not necessarily mean the Universal goal is superior to the Private goal, it’s only more natural. A species working toward the Private goal would not split into different species as much as one working toward the Universal goal. The Universal species depend on evolution adapt them to a new environment, so if speciation occurs, because the environments differ and the populations within them differentiate genetically, then so be it. The Universal goal oriented species develop through evolution. The Private goal oriented species develop of their own accord, although they are affected by evolution just like all other forms of life, it will seem like much less of a change compared to their rapid independent development.