# Nuclear Families

Points:

- Disclaimer
    - I'm not a psychologist or sociologist or even a parent. I cannot pretend to know how children should be nurtured. However, based on what I do know, I can't help but marvel at the difference between how a trained professional compares to a layman.
    - This argument does not use many numbers or quantitative statistics. For the most part, this argument relies on some qualitative measures and the common sense I have picked up in my very cursory browsing of history, psychology, sociology and the like. If I had much more time, I could probably cobble a few statistics to solidify some of these qualitative claims, but even then I would trust the numbers far less than the qualitative relations, because the specific sources I use may easily be incomplete or biased, while my intuition takes into account sources I have come across for years (not to say my intuition doesn't have its share of bias). In short, I am willing to back up any of these qualitative claims, and if you poked me I would try to do so quantitatively and with sources, however, I think the observational claims here shouldn't be that difficult for anyone to swallow (it's the prescriptive arguments where I expect more resistance), so if you disagree, I suggest you talk to the psychologists, sociologists, and historians for the numbers. But, if the numbers are obviously inconsistent with what is outlined here, please let me know.
- History
    - The history of children and child rearing is filled with a stunning amount of suffering and damage both physical and especially mental. (Dan Carlin's episode)
    - Modern psychology is still a relatively young field, however
- What could this actually look like
    - For details, you really have to ask a child psychologist what the optimal program for child rearing is. Here's a basic overview of what I could imagine (if you have ideas, and especially if this is your area of expertise *please* help me improve outline)
    - First of all, I expect babies and toddlers probably need far more careful and structured care than older children. I could imagine that babies so young require a dedicated caretaker, since switching personnel frequently could lead them to have trust issues or feel uncomfortable (on the other hand maybe not → ask psychologists, maybe conduct some studies!). In any case, I think it's probably the most reasonable to assign small teams of 2-4 caretakers to focus their entire time on the same batch of 4-8 babies (depending on what number makes sense logistically and psychologically). At least one of these caretakers should probably be available for their batch 24/7 (thereby ensuring that each baby gets everything it needs). Additional studies could shed light on the ideal age of babies when they benefit from social interactions with other babies (either consistently the same ones or always different ones), in which case they can be kept nearby to make care more efficient.
    - Then as the children become old enough for kindergarten (or more generally to socialize in a semi-supervised environment), the caretaker structure can gradually adjust. Now, I think it's more reasonable to cycle the personnel more (to improve flexibility with timing, shifts, training new caretakers, and the like), and to increase the batch size to maybe 8-16 for 4-6 caretakers. Those caretakers that took care of the children when they were babies could stay with the toddlers (to avoid attachment issues).
    - Child education can be controlled and structured far more effectively. First of all, based on what psychologists determine to be the right age, pace, and material to cover, children can be taught in groups or individually (especially with robotics and AI speeding up simple tasks where ever is deemed appropriate).
        - If deemed effective, this could allow psychologists to determine the optimal way to specialize or condition children for certain environments/tasks. For example, those children showing an accelerated ability for certain kinds of tasks like reading, might be given additional help in that direction, or
    - Children could optionally travel between a few different care centers around the world, thereby benefiting from the slight (or deliberate) differences between each center, the culture of the people there, and the interactions with people that grew up in very different environments.
    - Obviously, we have extensive biological machinery (from hormones and pheromones to breast milk) that encourages those parents that actually produced the child to want to take care of children. This urge doesn't have to be repressed (why fight biology when we can piggyback off of it!), instead new parents can optionally train and join the professional caretakers either temporarily (eg. until the hormones wear off, or their other interests/work overpower them) or permanently (if they found their calling).
    - Considering how demanding the caretaker job is (both in terms of necessary training, dedication, and possibly unpredictable time tables), this is a very important profession for society. Significant vetting and training are undoubtedly necessary, and just as psychologists are tasked to study the children's progress, so too can psychologists keep an eye on the caretakers to ensure that they remain motivated, well-rested, and generally effective. Nevertheless, thanks to the strong biological urges in humans, I would be surprised if there is ever a shortage in caretakers (either short-term or long-term).
    - While there is not much reason for children to interact much with any adults other than their caretakers, especially as they get older they could probably significantly benefit by interacting with as many different perspectives as possible, including past generations.
    - In terms of child conception, the society can decide how to regulation is appropriate. However, given our current society, where there no regulation on the conception and rearing of children, apparently even in chaos humans seem to survive. If we put some thought into how. To me at least (partially suffering under the biases of my own culture and morals), it seems unnecessary to forbid any adults from conceiving children, provided they want the best future for their children they can provide (in our society that could mean any number of things, however with a universal childcare system proposed here, I can't imagine that the parents wouldn't want to.
- Arguments against this
    - The variance of child-rearing is beneficial - this is hardly an argument - if it's measurable, psychologists can measure it and build it into the universal childcare system.
    - There isn't enough interest for this project - caretakers will always be understaffed and as a result (or alternatively) there'll be caretakers that are not passionate about taking care of children, thereby causing systematic damage to children, rather than the sporadic damage in nuclear families.
    - Nuclear families only work because the parents are biologically related to the children. A caretaker that is not directly related does not have as strong filial bonds, and thereby cannot care for the children as well - I think this point will be very challenging to support, especially considering the prevalence and success rate of adoption in our society.
- Why we need to get rid of it?
    - We leave child rearing and education to just about **anyone**. That's like picking a random stranger off the street to build your house - no it's worse, because if the house collapses, then that just harms you, but in this case, a mistreated child does damage to the entire next generation (either directly through crime or indirectly by missed potential/motivation)
    - Another step towards specialization
- What if
    - Imagine a world where 100% of children are brought up from birth by highly trained professionals, day in and day out, teams of psychologists and caretakers catering to the child's every need while also preparing them for adulthood using cutting edge psychology.
    - How much would that cost society - probably a significant amount? But considering how much this could save our society, and how much this could improve our society, I'm pretty sure the budget here is close to infinite.
        - The conventional model of a nuclear family has one out of every two parents taking care of their children full time. That means, purely in terms of man-hours, 50% of the labor in the entire economy is spent on children. Realistically, we probably spend far less labor because not even close to all families have a parent that can take care of them full time. Then again, we do have some professional caretakers including the K-12 education sector (including teachers, administrators, and associated staff), child healthcare (pediatrics, and therapists), and miscellaneous caretakers (anything from sports coaches and summer camp organizers to baby sitters). It's hard to say precisely how much that is, but it's sure to be a significant chunk.
        - The portion of children growing up in a bad environment (however psychologists define that term) drops to essentially 0.
        - How much is the environment you grow up in a factor in how much you will achieve? In crime rates (especially violent crimes)?
    - Controlled experiments on children to make measurable progress in child psychology.
        - This doesn't mean psychologists won't be at least as much, if not more scrutiny with respect to keeping experiments ethical and not mistreating children (ie decreasing the productivity of children when they reach adulthood).
        - This means that instead of the highly uncertain and imprecise data psychologists currently use to make progress, they have access to an unprecedented level of precision, and comprehensiveness of data.
    - For most of the animal kingdom, understanding the mechanics of sex and finding a mate is sufficient for rearing offspring. However, humans can benefit from the extensive collective intelligence we have built through the complex social interactions where we share experiences and knowledge across generations. With all that knowledge, are we really not able to design a better set of criteria for to make a person ready for child rearing?
    - All children are reared by professionals that genuinely want to care for children (both the caretakers on the ground directly nurturing the children, and the psychologists behind the scenes optimizing very step). No neglect, no mistreatment, no broken homes.