# Constructs

Written by Felix Leeb on March 11, 2020.

---

Topics:

- Math as a game of constructing convincing arguments
    - Let's play a game: I say a string of words (call it a statement), and you get to either agree or disagree. If you agree, the game is over (maybe we play again and you get to make an argument). If you disagree, then the fun begins: I must find a way to convince you to agree with my statement, and you try to convince me otherwise. What string of words I choose has no meaning outside of the game (in fact it can't, as we'll discuss later), however, I may have to choose my words very carefully to hear those sweet, sweet words "I agree", or eventually concede, with a muffled "you're right, I was wrong". Obviously, if I convince you, I get a point and win, and if you convince me otherwise you win.
    - Now this game can be played with more than two players, in fact, that's the way to score lots of points. For each person that disagrees with your statement, you get a point. There's a lot of people out there, and you can probably find someone that will disagree with you about just about any statement - so here's your chance - change their minds and you can win big!
    - Let's consider a few strategies for this game. First, how about I bring a gun. There's a good chance that no matter what statment I choose, you will agree if I'm holding a gun to your head, right? But is that strategy clearly suboptimal, because now if we play with lots of players, fact of the matter is, I will invariably eventually run out of bullets for all the nay sayers. Alternatively, on the next day, you might bring an even bigger gun, and then I expect my arguments will suddenly sound significantly less convincing when I'm the one with a gun to my head.
    - No the best strategy must be far more airtight. I could try to collect and show you heaps of evidence. The problem with real evidence is, no matter how many mountains I bury you in, you can always come up with a deficiency in all my evidence, some little room for error. For example, let's say my statement is: "the sun will rise tomorrow", and you disagree. For evidence, I present you with accounts of various people detailing how the sun has risen everyday in written history. I can teach you astrophysics and show you the measurements by astronomers to back up every single astronomical claim. We can define each word in my statement in excruciating detail and connect my statement to astronomy. You can still, quite reasonably reply with: "no matter how much evidence we have about the sun's behavior in the past and the explanations of why the sun behaved that way, we don't know ***for certain*** that the sun will actually rise tomorrow." That's it - I'm stumpted, because you are right. We could even wait until tomorrow, and even then as we watch the sun rise, you could still reasonably argue that your eyes may be playing tricks on you, or that it might look like the sun is rising, but actually it's just a really bright lightbulb someone installed overnight. The point is, no matter how much evidence I accumulate, there is still some uncertainty in my claim, so you can point to this uncertainty and safely disagree with my statement - refusing me my win. So evidence does **NOT** produce the most convincing arguments.
    - Thankfully, there is a field that is entirely devoted to mastering this game. There are countless people whose livelihood depends on this game. Their strategy is called "mathematics". This strategy gives you an endless supply of possible statements to make, and most importantly, a systematic way of convincing any adversary of the truth of those statements, which mathematicians call "proving" the statement. The seemingly magical property of these "proofs", is that once your opponents have heard them, they are forced to agree with your statement, no matter what it was.
    - Here's the catch. This brilliant strategy can only be used for very specific kinds of statements. It's not like this is really an issue for the game, because there are an guaranteed to be an endless number of compatible statements. Unfortunately, the no part of the statement may refer to anything in the real world. Instead, math invents lots of made up words that all have very specific relationships with one another (thereby making proofs possible). Therefore, a proof consists of In short, if you want to be the absolute master of this game and always win without fail, study math. However, if you want to do literally anything that has to do with the real world, then studying math could well be completely pointless.
- The domain of mathematical arguments
    - What exactly is a proof?
        - A very convincing argument - therefore if you play the game, you seek proofs because as soon as you prove something, no one can ever question it again.
        - For specifically that reason - science does not and fundamentally cannot deal in proofs. There is nothing - not a single "fact" - that cannot be questioned or second-guessed in science (so calling scientific statements "facts" is rather misleading)
- What is missing
- A static world
- Discovery - being smart vs being dumb
    - Contrast with science
        - Scientific discoveries show that we are smart, mathematical "discoveries" show that we were dumb.
    - A mathematical proof is not progress. It's not possible to progress in math, because the truth value of every mathematical statement is static for all eternity.
- Conclusions
    - Should we burn all pure mathematicians at the stake? No, probably not.
    -